ARRL Technical Information Service 
Morse Transmission Timing Standard

File: code-std.txt 
Updated: 12-13-96
Author: Michael Tracy, KC1SX (email: tis@arrl.org)

Reprinted from: April 1990 QEX "A Standard for Morse Timing Using the
Farnsworth Technique"

Copyright 1990 by The American Radio Relay League, Inc. 
All rights reserved.

Prepared as a membership service by the American Radio Relay League, Inc., 
Technical Information Service.

For your convenience, you may reproduce this information, 
electronically or on paper, and distribute it to anyone who needs 
it, provided that you reproduce it in its entirety and do so free 
of charge. Please note that you must reproduce the information as 
it appears in the original, including the League's copyright 
notice.

If you have any questions concerning the reproduction or 
distribution of this material, please contact Michael Tracy, 
American Radio Relay League, 225 Main St., Newington, CT 06111 
(email: tis@arrl.org).

-----------------------------------------------------------------
A Standard for Morse Timing Using the Farnsworth Technique
by Jon Bloom, KE3Z, ARRL Laboratory

In recent years there has been a renewed interest in Farnsworth timing 
of Morse transmissions.  Farnsworth timing is defined as sending the 
characters at a faster speed than the words.  For example, sending the 
characters at 20 WPM but adding enough time between them to slow 
down the rate to 10 WPM.

The problem in learning Morse is that at speeds above a few WPM, 
Morse is most easily read by ear when the characters are recognized 
rhythmically rather than by counting the dots and dashes.  But the 
person just learning Morse starts at very slow speeds, where counting 
is easier than recognizing the slow rhythm of the characters.  So in 
order to increase their ability to read Morse above a few words per 
minute, students are forced to shift from the counting mode to the 
rhythm recognition mode.  This probably the cause of the oft-
mentioned "13-WPM barrier."

The idea behind the Farnsworth method is to eliminate the counting 
phase by sending the characters at a speed at which rhythm recognition 
is easy and counting is not.  This forces the student to learn the 
rhythms.  Initially, the rate of transmission is slowed (by the addition of
 
time between characters) to allow the student to gradually build the skill
 
at recognizing and writing the received text.  The process by which the 
student recognizes the characters is never changed; he just gets better 
(faster) at doing so.

Recently, ARRL, finished converting all of its Morse material to 
Farnsworth timing.  ARRL, is using a standard of sending transmission 
at an 18-WPM character rate. (Of course, at 18 WPM and faster 
speeds, ARRL transmission revert to standard timing, since no extra 
time has to be inserted.)  This standard applies to all code practice and 
test tapes, and to W1AW transmissions.

In implementing Morse generation here at ARRL. We ran across a 
problem:  There is no standard for Farnsworth timing.  In fact, we 
couldn't find any definitive specification for how Farnsworth timing is 
calculated.  It's fine to say that you're going to transmit, for example, a
 
10 WPM text using 18-WPM characters, but exactly how much time 
needs to be added to the transmission, and where?  The ARRL code 
tapes and W1AW transmissions are generated by computers, and you 
need a specific answer to that question to write the computer program.  
Thus, the ARRL, has settled on a standard character speed of 18 
WPM, this is not inherent in the idea of Farnsworth timing - any speed 
can be used.

From QEX, April, 1990 Page 8/9

The ARRL Morse Transmission Timing Standard

1. General

	This standard is motivated by recent changes in the systems 
used to generate Morse text for ARRL.

1.1 Scope

	This standard defines the timing parameters used for all ARRL 
Morse training materials, including code-practice tapes, code tests and 
W1AW Morse transmissions.

2. Timing

	At speeds of 18 WPM and above, standard timing specified in 
2.1 will be used.  At speeds below 18 WPM, Farnsworth timing 
specified in 2.2 will be used.

2.1 Standard timing
	Standard timing is as follows:

The period of a single dot is one unit, measure in seconds.

A dash is a period of three units.

A period of one unit separates each element (dot or dash) within a 
character.

A period of three units separates each character within a word.  A 
period of seven units separates each word.

	For purposes of specifying code speed, the "PARIS" 50-unit 
standard is used. (1) From that standard, the following relationship is 
derived:

u = (1.2)/c

where:
	u = period of one unit, in seconds
	c = speed of transmission, in words per minute (WPM)

2.2  Farnsworth timing
	At speeds below 18 WP{M, characters are sent using 18-WPM, 
characters are sent using 18-WPM timing, but with extra delay added 
between characters and words to produce an overall lower speed.

	Speeds are specified as s/c, where s is the overall transmission 
sped and c is character speed. For example , a 5-WPM transmission 
sent with 18-WPM characters is specified as 5/18 speed.

	The character timing used is as specified in 2.1 (above), using 
the unit, dot and dash periods., as well as the one-unit inter element 
spacing.  The adjustment to a lower speed is made by adding delay 
between characters and words.  The added delays are constant for a 
given Farnsworth speed and will maintain the 3/7 ration of character 
space to word space.

	The added delays are calculated as follows:

Ta = (60c - 37.2s)/sc

Tc = (3Ta)/19

Tw = (7Ta)/19

where:
	Ta = Total delay to add to the characters (31 units) of a 
standard 50 - unit word, in seconds

	Tc = period between characters, in seconds
	Tw = period between words, in seconds

Reference
(1)  Hale, Bruce S., et al, The 1989 ARRL Handbook for the Radio 
Amateur, Newington, CT, ARRL, 1988, p 19-4

Appendix A - Derivation of Timing Equations

A. 1 Unit period

	The unit period, u, is derived from the "PARIS" 50 - unit 
standard as follows:

	s words of 50 - units each transmitted in the space of one 
minute are, by definition, being transmitted at s words per minute.  
Thus, units are occurring at 50s unites per minute.  The equation is:

	r = 50s            where r is the rate in units/minute

To convert to units/second:

r (units/minute) x (1 Min/60 Sec) = (r/60) = (50s/60) = (5s/6)

the reciprocal gives u, the period of a unit in seconds:

u = (6/5s) = (1.2/s)

A.  2 Farnsworth Timing Delays

	The total delay added to each 50 - unit word transmitted is the 
difference between the time it takes to send the word using standard 
timing at speed s (the overall speed) and the time it takes to send just 
the characters at speed c (the character speed).  The time it takes to 
send a 50 - unit word at speed s is, by definition:

	T50 = 50 x (1.2/s) seconds

A  standard 5 - letter, 50-unit word contains 31 units of element and 
interelement spacing (that is everything exclusive of intercharacter and 
interword spacing).  The time it takes to send 31 units at speed c is:

	T31 = 31 x (1.2/c) = (37.2/c) seconds

	The difference between these two times at a given Farnsworth 
(s/c) speed is therefore:

	Ta = (60/s) - (37.2/c)  where s and c are as defined in paragraph 
2.2

or, by algebra:

	Ta = (60c - 37.2s)/sc

In the transmitted word, this delay is divided among four intercharacter 
spaces, each Tc long, and one interword space Tw long, representing 
19 total units (4 x 3 + 7 = 19).  This gives the relationships for the 
division of Ta into these delays:

Tc = (3Ta)/ 19  and  Tw = (7Ta)/19

---------------------------------END------------------------------
Note: The Farnsworth timing came from the late Donald R. "Russ" 
Farnsworth, W6TTB, who in the late 1950s asked Bart Bartlett, W6OWP, 
to help him prepare some tapes for a code course he had developed. 
Farnsworth's unique method of instruction was to maintain the code 
speed at a constant 13 WPM throughout the course, but starting with 
simple text and increasing the complexity of the text material as the
course progressed. (excerpt from the April 1988 QST Correspondence 
column). He later went on to create Epsilon Records which sold a CW 
learning system on long playing records.

The text of this Standard has been entered as a Standard ASCII text 
file, without using the text formating that was available in the original 
QEX article.  Where subscripts have been used in the original they are 
replaced by capital letters followed by a lower case letter.  Where 
division is performed the leading numerator is shown in brackets "(" 
and ")" and the denominator following the "/".  

Notes by Larry Kayser, VA3LK / WA3ZIA

*EOF

